.Dd January 28, 2026
.Dt PARADOS 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm parados
.Nd simple (HTTP) media server
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm parados
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is a minimal (HTTP) media server used to serve local audio and video
files over a network.
It provides a small and stable interface designed to be used by
external clients such as media players or web frontend interfaces.
.Pp
The server scans a directory tree at startup and exposes the contents
through its simple HTTP API.
Each file is assigned a hashed identifier derived from its relative
path.
.Pp
.Nm
does not provide a graphical interface.
All user interaction is expected to occur through clients.
.Sh OPERATION
On startup,
.Nm
performs the following steps:
.Bl -enum -compact
.It
Load configuration from
.Pa /etc/parados.conf,
or 
.Pa ./parados.conf
if the system-wide file is not present.
.It
Scan the configured media directory and build a library.
.It
Bind to the configured address and port.
.It
Accept HTTP connections and serve requests.
.El
.Pp
Each incoming connection is handled independently.
The server is designed for minimising complexity as opposed to concurrency.
.Sh HTTP INTERFACE
The following endpoints are provided:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Pa /ping
Return a plain text response to indicate that the server is running.
.It Pa /library
Return a JSON document describing the media library.
.It Pa /meta/<id>
Return metadata for a single media item.
.It Pa /stream/<id>
Stream the raw contents of a media file.
Byte range requests are supported.
.It Pa /queue
Return an M3U playlist containing all accessible media items.
.El
.Pp
Authentication may be required depending on configuration.
.Sh AUTHENTICATION
.Nm
supports HTTP Basic authentication.
Authentication is optional and configured through
.Xr parados.conf 5 .
.Pp
If no users are defined, requests are served without authentication.
If one or more users are defined, all requests apart from
.Pa /ping
require valid credentials.
.Pp
Access to files is restricted per user based on configured allow-list.
.Sh CONFIGURATION
Configuration is read from
.Xr parados.conf 5 .
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Ex -std
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr parados.conf 5 ,
.Xr parados-protocol 7
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Abhinav Prasai

