.Dd January 28, 2026
.Dt PARADOS.CONF 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm parados.conf
.Nd configuration file for parados
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
file configures
.Xr parados 1 .
.Pp
The file format is line-oriented.
Each non-empty, non-comment line is a key/value pair int he form:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
key=value
.Ed
.Pp
Whitespace around keys and values are ignored.
Lines beginning with
.Sq #
are comments and are ignored.
Invalid keys are ignored.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Pa /etc/parados.conf
System-wide configuration file.
.It Pa ./parados.conf
Fallback configuration file in the current working directory.
.El
.Sh PARAMETERS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ic media_dir
Directory containing all media files.
The library is built by recursively scanning this directory at startup.
.Pp
Example:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
media_dir=/path/to/media
.Ed
.It Ic server_addr
Address to bind the HTTP server to.
Use
.Cm 127.0.0.1
to listen on the local host only.
This is also recommended if you are soley using a WebUI interface
hosted from the same device as exposing the server to the whole
network may uncessesarily open your server to danger.
Use
.Cm 0.0.0.0
to listen on all IPv4 interfaces.
.Pp
Example:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
server_addr=0.0.0.0
.Ed
.It Ic server_port
TCP port to listen on.
.Pp
Example:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
server_port=8088
.Ed
.It Ic verbose_log
Enable or disable verbose logging.
Accepted values are
.Cm 1 ,
.Cm 0 ,
.Cm true ,
.Cm false ,
.Cm yes ,
and
.Cm no
(case-insensitive).
.Pp
Example:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
verbose_log=true
.Ed
.It Ic cors_origin
Configure Cross-Origin Resource Sharing (CORS) for web clients.
.Pp
If empty, CORS header is sent.
If set to
.Cm * ,
all origins are allowed, otherwise, the value is interpreted as a
comma-separated list of allowed origins (clients that can interact
over the web).
.Pp
Example:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
cors_origin=http://127.0.0.1:8000
.Ed

.It Ic http_io_timeout
Maximum number of seconds the server will block on a single socket
read/write operation.
.Pp
This limits how long a client may stall for while sending a request or
while receiving a response.
If the timeout is exceeded, the connection is closed.
.Pp
This option used for protecting against stalled or bad-acting clients.
This does not limit the duration of a request or stream, only I/O operations.
.Pp
Valid values are integers in the range 1 to 300.
.Pp
Example:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
http_io_timeout=5
.Ed

.El
.Sh AUTHENTICATION
Authentication entries are specified using repeated groups of the keys
.Ic user ,
.Ic pass ,
and
.Ic allow .
.Pp
If no
.Ic user
entries are present, authentication is disabled and all files are
accessible.
If one or more users are present, HTTP Basic authentication is required
for all requests (except
.Pa /ping ).
.Pp
Each
.Ic user
starts a new entry.
The following
.Ic pass
and
.Ic allow
lines apply to that user until the next
.Ic user
line.
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ic user
Set the username for a new authentication entry.
.Pp
Example:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
user=glenda
.Ed
.It Ic pass
Set the password for the most recently declared user.
If empty, the account is passwordless and accepts only an empty password.
.Pp
Example:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
pass=secret
.Ed
.It Ic allow
Add an allowed path prefix for the most recently declared user.
Multiple
.Ic allow
directives may be used.
.Pp
A value of
.Cm *
allows all paths.
Otherwise, the value must match the beginning of a file's relative path.
The match allows directory boundaries.
.Pp
Example:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
allow=Media/
allow=Music/
.Ed
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
Minimal configuration:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
media_dir=/path/to/media
server_addr=127.0.0.1
server_port=8088
verbose_log=true
cors_origin=
.Ed
.Pp
Two users with separate access:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
user=glenda
pass=pass123
allow=Media/
allow=Music/

user=bob
pass=
allow=TV/NBA/
.Ed
.Pp
Single passwordless admin user with full access:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
user=admin
pass=
allow=*
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr parados 1
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Abhinav Prasai

